Everyone's read the script, right?
-Yeah.
- Okay.
So let’s start the discussion.
- I have a question.
Why did you choose that
as the tone of the play?
I'm just curious.
It’s like a period piece
with a mix of your previous character Mauro.
- Why--
- With a hint of gayness?
- Yeah.
- A hint of gayness, really.
- The theme is serious.
If you notice, it’s very me,
very melodramatic.
I've always been melodramatic.
Then I added a bit of Mauro's character
to diffuse the drama.
However, Mauro will
become the reflection of,
the voice of the people.
- Your intention here, for example--
Would you want the audience
to really feel for the character
or have a commentary?
It's like a melodrama, right?
What's your view on that?
- First and foremost,
the objective was really to...
tell the audience that,
as cliché as it may sound,
love hits everyone.
Whatever your profession,
whatever your vocation,
when it hits you,
it hits you.
You can't escape from it.
However,
at the end of the day,
however hard it hits you,
you can decide what to do.
Ignore it, embrace it,
it’s always the idea
that people will always have a choice.
My first question was,
“Just because he’s a priest,
can’t he love anymore?”
He can, he’s human.
“Just because you're married,
you can’t love someone else anymore?”
You can, ‘cause you're just human.
Except at the end of the day,
when you take into consideration
the discussion
of morality and societal norms,
you have to choose.
Because, sometimes,
it may be acceptable to us,
but there are consequences
which we want to avoid.
Secondly,
I wanted to come up with a play
that could spark discourse about the...
I don't know if this
is the right word
but the conspiracy of the church
and the state or the ruling elite.
These two institutions are huge
and there’s a lot
that’s happening within,
but even if people see it,
they choose to ignore it.
"Oh but since it's the church,
it won't ever make mistakes."
"No, it's the government.
They won't ever make mistakes."
They turn a blind eye.
We chose to--
People choose to be quiet,
to be mum about it,
even if what they’re doing
is already obvious.
I also want to emphasize
the fact that we have
a lot of commentary
on other people’s lives,
but we don't bother enough
with our own lives.
We can gossip about a priest
who's in love with a woman
or a priest in love with a man.
But our flaws as humans
is that we don’t pay
enough attention to our own homes
and we forcefully cover it up
by focusing on other people’s stories.
- I would just like to add
to what J-mee said.
When I was reading this, it felt like,
although I haven’t read sarsuwelas,
but I’m getting that kind of vibe.
Like it's coming from that tradition.
But while reading Mauro,
it feels like he’s the only one
who’s trying to break free
from the tradition of that genre.
It’s usually for comic relief,
but this is my first time
to encounter this kind of character.
Why did you choose to make Mauro
different from the rest
of the characters?
It's like they're all period characters
and Mauro's from the present.
While I was writing the play,
I was thinking that Mauro
was invisible to them.
That was my take on Mauro.
While writing, I was thinking,
well here they can see Mauro,
but at the back of my mind,
what if Mauro
is an invisible person
who gives commentaries
on what’s happening.
They don't hear him
but they can still
interact with him.
I though of including
Mauro as a character
because I want him
to be the one who'll open
the audience’s mindset
and consciousness.
He’ll act as the vessel
for whatever the characters
want to say or explain, but can’t.
He’ll be the one to unearth
the inner demons of the community.
It’s like in commedia dell'arte,
you think he’s the fool
but he's actually the wise one.
- I hope you could've
maximized him in the last part.
In the beginning,
he was very active,
but in terms of resolving the three—
how will he be
instrumental in all of this.
- I'm not sure how--
- In the resolution?
I’m not sure how he’ll help.
Given the very
melodramatic form,
since it’s like a soap opera,
viewers are aware of this kind of format.
Usually, they know or anticipate
what's going to happen
because they're familiar
with the form.
How will you push it further
while not making it campy?
You already used Mauro to diffuse
the melodrama.
How will you push,
not break, the drama,
the plot itself?
There are shootouts,
some rivalry and so on.
How you developed it was good.
We thought Fr. Victor and Sarah
would end up together but they didn't.
How will you push it further?
When the audience is watching,
they already have expectations.
"They're going to beat her up.
Or rape her. I bet they raped her."
Aren't the audience like that?
How are you going to push it?
Where we'll see
unexpected twists or add-ons.
Something like challenging
the melodrama genre.
I'm thinking of how to make it
unpredictable or how do you...
I don't know
if it's with the lines or plot.
In the latter part of the story,
after this part,
after the town and the spiel,
until they get to the house,
where Jaime and Sarah
went home fighting.
I was laughing at the exercise
this morning with May's case,
how the scene led to miscarriage.
The same thing
happened here.
There was pushing and pulling
until there was bleeding.
And because of that incident,
since Fr. Victor already knew
the child was his,
he said,
"God!"
"If I were to choose right now,
I'd rather my child live"
"and let my love go."
"I'll continue serving
as a priest for the rest of my life."
On the other hand,
on Jaime's side,
"Wait, I loved her."
"I'm not a vulgar person,
I loved this woman."
There was a scene
where they prayed together
and he said,
"Just let my wife and child live."
"And I'll let her go."
Both of them
were ready to let her go.
And it's up to Sarah to decide
what she wants to do.
Whether she wants to go
with the priest or not.
Until she had a talk with the maid
and realized, "No,"
"I'll stay with Jaime."
"He's my husband."
"I'll stay with him."
She's (Direk Ellen) surprised.
- She disagrees.
- She doesn't like it.
Sarah chose to stay
with her husband.
Because in the dialogue
I wrote at the latter part of the story,
she was loved.
He loved her.
The way in which--
Because of Jaime's
overflowing love for her,
Jaime could've been
too drunk on love
that's why he raped her.
- In short, the way
he loves has always been very rough.
Are you familiar
with the kind of love that--
Or he just thought he loved her.
Maybe so.
And justified his wrongdoings
in the name of love--
- Do you want to redeem Jaime?
- Because it could end
with the systemic problem
of women succumbing to societal norms.
Based on your draft,
you kind of redeemed him.
That could be one thing,
I'm not sure.
In the beginning,
you had stock characters.
The evil politician, the good priest,
that was how you started, right?
Maybe you could challenge
how they're described.
Like a way for the characters
to justify themselves
and make you think
they actually have a point.
You could play with that
to change the stock characters.
Like apologizing after
a drunken, violent stupor.
Apologizing after slapping her,
things like that.
- Like he's crazy, but--
- He's actually a good person.
I don't know, just to...
but he's still not a good person.
He needs help.
I think the problem
that’s beginning to appear
is that the character changes
according to
the situation of the scene.
You started with the impression
that the mayor is incompetent.
The city is chaotic,
land disputes are rampant.
The impression was
that the mayor is corrupt.
But all of a sudden
at the end of the play, he says he is not
and we’re supposed
to believe him.
Because...
For some weird logic,
he let his wife go.
And that act,
which is an act of sacrifice
and an act of surrender,
may seem to have absolved
all the bad things he has done
in about 80% of the play.
Something like that
I think it all started there.
It seems like the
whole situation was reversed.
You made Sarah look like
she ran to the priest,
but this priest already
made a vow to the Lord
that he'd let go of Sarah
in exchange for the baby's life
and that he's true to his words
and will fulfill his promise.
Sarah suddenly feels left out
so she goes back to the man,
to Jaime, who gladly accepts her.
I think, I feel that
you got cornered as a writer.
The ending is beautiful--
the child is there,
the priest is there,
they're all there, but they know
the child is the priest's.
And the child is being
cared for by a family.
That's the story
you envisioned, right?
But how it got there,
you, I think, were forced
or compelled
to change the definition
of your characters.
Jaime suddenly became
kind and no longer corrupt.
But Mauro continuously asserts
that this whole
dynasty of politicians,
of which Jaime
is the shining example,
is really corrupt.
And their wealth is
a product of land disputes
and of their refusal to
provide the people
the service they are entitled to.
The whole situation
becomes contradictory.
He was raping his own wife,
he was pointing guns
inside the church,
nobody would even
think of doing that.
The impunity given
to the character is so high
that you had to redeem everything
in one scene
just to get to the ending.
It might be that
right from the start,
you have to rewrite Jaime
if you want
to get to that ending you want.
The ending is beautiful,
the final image.
But how it got there
doesn't convince me yet.
Because it seemed like Sarah,
when she got rejected
by the one she loves,
suddenly went back
to the one she doesn’t love.
Why can’t she be alone?
- In the story,
Sarah doesn’t know
what happened
with Fr. Victor and Jaime.
She made
that decision herself.
Yeah, but that
makes her look like...
some kind of opportunist.
Like, "I'll just be with anyone
who accepts me."
"I wonder why
he didn't accept me."
"Three scenes ago,"
"he was willing
to give up priesthood."
"But now that I have his child,
he doesn't want to anymore."
"What happened?"
"I'll just go back
to the one who raped me then."
In the end, she realized
she loved him apparently.
- In the first part, she constantly--
- A lot of things suddenly changed.
- She defended him.
Aren't women like that?
- She kept on trying to understand him.
- It was justification.
But Victor convinced her to get out of it.
I guess you have to also
put yourselves
in the shoes of your characters
in terms of what they’ll decide
when confronted with this.
If I were Sarah and I was free
from my husband,
and Victor tells me that
he'd continue with priesthood,
I'd probably curse
the hell out of him
and leave this goddamn place!
- That's a good twist in a typical soap opera.
- But I'd probably feel like--
"What is with this situation?"
"What is this? I sacrificed a lot
and almost died for you."
And then--
[inaudible]
that was where I--
I mean I could--
I can still accept
the whole thing
because it’s in the sarsuwela mode.
And in the sarsuwela,
we have Mauro as a
comic character.
You made him gay.
Towards the end,
similar to musicals,
it starts lightly with people
laughing and all
until it reaches the end
with the killing scenes.
If you notice,
most musicals are like that.
Be it broadway or sarsuwela,
it really needs to show
them falling and bleeding,
their heart getting crushed,
and then something comes out.
A phoenix rising from the ashes.
The phoenix in this case
is the baby, the young boy.
The problem is how
do we get there?
Because you started
with stock characters:
a corrupt powerful politician
versus a newbie,
a priest returning for vengeance.
In the end,
his objective changed
to getting the woman back.
Since both are too strong,
the only inevitable thing
that could happen
is someone has to die
in order to get the woman.
But you didn’t do that.
You didn't kill anyone off,
not even the child.
Sarah bled and all,
but the child clung for dear life.
Unlike in May's story where the baby
died instantly from just a push.
- What a poor child, what a loose grip!
If, because of that--
I'm just describing what I think
went on in your mind as an author
is you had to change it,
which made everything unconvincing.
You end up unsure
why things happened.
I think the problem's somewhere there.
You might have to
work your way back
to tweaking Jaime
and the other characters.
- I just thought of this
as we're discussing...
- Because of what happened,
Jaime’s character changed.
- Removing the do-gooder part of Jaime,
- Which one?
- His "turn around".
Removing that part,
will it still be consistent?
- But will Sarah
go back to him again?
- Sarah would...
- Women would refuse to go back.
- Women’s rights groups
would tell her to leave.
That’s the inevitable thing
that’ll happen,
feminism aside.
Right from the start,
Sarah’s objective
was to leave their marriage.
Victor or no Victor.
She just got braver
when Victor came.
Suddenly, in the end,
when she was free,
she went back
to Jaime on her own.
That's what made it iffy.
Even if you change Jaime,
you want to go to the ending
that you saw in that town, right?
The situation that you set up
seems to be pointing
you to the inevitable end
where either someone will die
to fix the whole dilemma
or you need to tweak
the characters.
There are a lot of possibilities
and alternatives.
Jaime doesn't have to be
a corrupt politician.
His father may be the one.
- But there's a stigma on Jaime.
[inaudible]
That’s the solution
I had for “Bayan Ko”.
The child was subservient,
but really didn't want to be.
That gives him some
modicum of saving grace
to fall in love with someone
from the other side.
That will force him to get out.
Something like that.
His marriage with Sarah
could've been arranged.
You might have to tweak it.
I’m just giving you examples.
You don’t have to do that.
All I'm saying is maybe
the fixing is not just at the last part
for the ending
to be more convincing.
Yes, maybe there’s a need
to revise things even from the start.
Yeah, something like that.
At the same time,
you also want to show
how rotten the government
and the church is.
We don’t see it yet because all of them...
They don’t seem to represent anything
that will really destroy the institutions.
We don’t even know
who killed Victor’s father.
- He had a promise
in the beginning with his dad.
- I was thinking...
- "Noli Me Tangere" style.
- Is Fr. Victor going for revenge,
just like the Crisostomo character?
- But it turns out that was just part
of the background.
- Which I thought was going to surface,
but instead the story focused on Sarah and Victor.
That was where
his anger was coming from.
- I think I was wrong
to take that part out
because it was becoming too long.
- That's why...
- There was one part I took out
because it reached about 110 pages.
- It was about Jaime's father
who killed Victor's father.
- Victor's father was locked
in the basement.
Yeah, but why did he kill him?
Union leader?
- He was the union leader
and already knew too much.
- And the most convenient way
to silence him is to just kill him.
- Do you think
that will help your ending?
- If not, he should probably
have some sort of sickness.
- Unless, it helps move the plot
and adds to the motivation
of the characters.
- What I was thinking of, J-mee...
Let's say it was Jaime’s father’s fault.
- For Victor, one's sin
becomes the sin of the whole family.
- Very judgmental.
- Like a victim of circumstances.
- There's an intermingling of accusations
that will lead to his revenge.
- It became a grudge.
But he’s not taking revenge,
he just went back for Sarah?
- He had an affair with Sarah.
Is that the revenge?
- Did he even do anything?
Actually, his "revenge" is to get Sarah.
- Unless it was intentional.
- Victor knows she's really loved--
- Ah, so it was intentional?
- He knows--
Victor knows that Jaime
really loves Sarah.
That's why he thought
of destroying their relationship.
Actually, the issue
about the father disappeared,
but in the beginning
you gave a hint
that Victor will discover the truth.
But that issue disappeared
because all the attention went to Sarah
which, I guess,
understandably, took much of the time
because you really
had to set it all up.
That this whole thing
took four months.
Maybe four months is too long.
Pregnant women
have bumps at four months.
Won't Jaime wonder, "Dear,"
"Why's your stomach
getting bigger?"
There are too many over-the-top
scenes that are shocking.
Like, for example,
in the beginning, Victor declares
he doesn't want to talk about the past
in front of Jaime and Sarah.
But when he sang,
he told them about everything.
He ended up telling the story.
There are dialogues
that are explanations
which I think
would have been better as songs.
Rather than saying,
"When you left,
and so on and so forth."
"I did this and that.
You don't know what happened to me."
he should just sing it.
There are scenes like those.
- Yeah, the gossiping parts.
Instead of gossiping,
they should just sing it.
And then, okay,
I'll go through it one by one.
I'm not so sure about this,
but Victor went to Manila
with the hopes of making things
better for himself and Sarah
and that's when he heard
she got married?
Is that it?
- Yeah.
Why did Victor go to Manila?
- He was studying philosophy,
not yet seminary.
- He was a scholar.
- He didn’t go there for his duties.
Okay.
When he found out that Sarah got married...
- The parish priest who adopted him
convinced him
not to go back to San Nicolas.
He urged Victor
to become a priest instead.
Even if he didn’t want to,
the priest convinced him still.
So he agreed when he learned
Sarah got married?
- Yeah, because he learned
they got married.
Isn’t it too late for him
to become a priest?
How long were they married?
- Does it take 10 years to become a priest?
- Around 10 years.
- They’re married for 10 years?
- Yes, they've been married for 10 years.
- And they still don't have a child?
See, Jaime's really infertile.
- So he rapes her still.
The scene we just read,
I find it redundant.
Even before the monsignor
found them having sex,
Victor already voiced out
that he didn’t want to be a priest.
So what's this scene for?
If he didn’t want
to become a priest anymore,
the next scene I would expect
is Victor packing up his things.
I mean what do you need to show,
he's just saying...
The monsignor just keeps
telling him she’s married.
For him to stop everything.
- That's where I got--
- In the scene where they got caught?
That part.
Afterwards,
Victor was very defiant.
"No, I won't leave Sarah.
I've made my choice."
"I'll leave priesthood behind."
Of course, the monsignor
is shocked to hear this.
Then after that,
the scene ended just like that,
with Sarah leaving
and Victor determined
to get out of priesthood
for Sarah.
But after that Victor goes,
"Go ahead Father, scold me. Swear at me."
It's like, wait a minute.
The monsignor was probably thinking,
"I thought you were already leaving?"
I’m confused because the issue
keeps on repeating
instead of moving forward.
- It could be...
- Could this scene and the scene
where they get caught happen simultaneously?
That's a possibility.
You could connect it there.
Could be.
But you should remove the
"When I was young..." and so on part.
Go directly to your moth metaphor,
like whatever you're going to do
will burn you in the end.
Something like that.
Although I really want you
to look for another metaphor,
- because that one's already--
- A cliche.
It's Teodora Alonzo's metaphor.
It's from Jose Rizal's time.
And then one more thing,
the villagers' song number
where Sarah gets dragged away
and suddenly there’s
an intermission number
where the villagers go,
"Have you heard?" and so on.
Finally, when the song ended,
you still continued with that scene.
- I used it as a device
so there'll be time for set change.
It doesn't need to be changed.
Just remove everything.
You could remove
that whole part
because it lessens
the momentum.
Skip to the part
where they're caught...
They were caught.
Then Jaime got ahold of Sarah,
He already had her,
but suddenly the people appear,
and so many rumors have spread.
Then you cut back
to Jaime still holding her.
Just remove it
and go forward.
If you want it to be short,
maybe with Mauro or whoever,
one blackout is enough.
How about you?
Ellen.
- For me, it just seems like...
- I think the two characters,
although this happens in real life,
seemed inconsistent.
- Like the priest, who was taking up something else,
but when told to become a priest, he agrees.
- Then he came back
and learned Sarah was raped
- so he decided to leave priesthood for her,
but in the end, he gave her up.
- Doesn't it seem so...
- What’s the growth in his character?
- He's always been inconsistent
with what he really wants.
- It’s the same for the woman.
- She really loved this guy,
but then she got raped.
- She couldn't tell anyone,
and so she agreed to get married.
- But she still liked Victor.
- And in the end,
she came back to Jaime.
- Their resolve
always seems to waver.
- So I don't know about their growth as characters.
- Or did they just accept the traps?
That's the ending?
- But you started the play
with the impression
that it’d be a rebellious play.
- That it would turn the tables
turn the tables on the church,
on politics, and on love.
- Because I remember
when you were talking about this
at its early stages that it was okay
to love more than one person.
- That you’re going to turn around
the concepts of love, politics, church.
- And yet the ending,
it went back
to the sanctity of marriage,
the oath of priesthood,
even if he never really chose
that as a vocation.
- That's what confuses me.
- I was set up to believe
that you’d turn the tables on institutions
but in the end...
- Based on Mauro's
criticism and comments,
it's a very pretentious society,
full of hypocrisies.
- Yet in the end,
they stick to all the trappings
of the church, of marriage.
- That's where I'm confused.
- I thought
of all those trappings
as the hypocrisies themselves.
- You know it’s wrong,
but we still tolerate it.
- "I'll just live with it" kind of thinking.
- So the ending is actually sad
because they all chose
to remain in their traps.
- It’s supposed to be a sad ending.
- The child grew up properly,
but everyone is trapped
in their own miseries.
- Well that happens.
If that’s what you’re going to do,
then you have to be clear about it.
It will therefore be in the framing
of the characters themselves.
How you define them.
Because right now, everything feels so sudden.
Why's the mayor suddenly good?
Why'd this suddenly happen?
Those kinds of things.
The objective
needs to be singular.
It’s either the character
gets it or not.
The characters can't suddenly
just change decisions.
80% of the play
they seem to be very determined
to do everything they promised to do.
Remember our lesson on speech acts?
When Victor declared,
"I can and I will renounce
priesthood for Sarah."
And then in one swift scene,
"I'll just go back to priesthood"
"because my child lived."
It's a bit...
There's an imbalance, right?
That’s the kind of thing
that’s done just to align with the ending.
- Actually, the statement is good
because in truth, a lot of people
continue even within their traps.
- Since that’s your ending,
I think the needed setup is,
- the next stage is the power
of the institutions.
- The power of the church,
- the communal beliefs that trap
individuals in situations they don’t want.
- How do you set up that power?
- That even Victor,
who sings about not giving up
even when getting burnt,
and yet gives up...
- What are those traps?
- I don't know the play's scope,
but if that's the message
- Then you’re talking
about powerful institutions
that individuals can’t seem to get away from.
- It’s a different kind of melodrama,
it's no longer drama.
- We're pushing
the limits of the genre.
- 'Cause it's usually very liberating.
It works for a sarsuwela.
The definition of the characters
are falling apart,
are unstable.
- It changed in the middle somewhere.
- In sarsuwelas,
they can pursue that...
Even I can’t see the promise
that Ellen (offscreen) is looking for.
Because in the end,
Mauro disappeared.
And he’s the only one
who sees everything in that light.
And he’s not a revolutionary.
He’s also an outcast
in a sense
because he’s gay, right?
So he’s not taken seriously,
which is a nice touch.
He’s like Cassandra
who’s telling the truth,
but nobody takes him seriously
just because he’s gay.
Maybe he should have a song on that.